---
title: Certificate Request CRD
authors:
  - "@joshvanl"
  - "@munnerz"
reviewers:
  - "@joshvanl"
  - "@munnerz"
approvers:
  - "@joshvanl"
  - "@munnerz"
editor: "@joshvanl"
creation-date: 2019-07-08
last-updated: 2023-03-24
status: implementable
---

# Certificate Request CRD

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  * [Goals](#goals)
  * [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  * [API Changes](#api-changes)
    + [Approved and Denied Conditions](#approved-and-denied-conditions)
      - [Behaviour](#behaviour)
      - [RBAC](#rbac)
        * [Scope](#scope)
        * [API Group](#api-group)
        * [Resource](#resource)
        * [Verbs](#verbs)
        * [Resource Names](#resource-names)
      - [Webhook signer string building](#webhook-signer-string-building)
      - [cert-manager Approver](#cert-manager-approver)
  * [Controller Behaviour](#controller-behaviour)
    + [ACME](#acme)
    + [Issuing Controller](#issuing-controller)
  * [Failure](#failure)
  * [Internal API Resource Behaviour](#internal-api-resource-behaviour)
  * [CertificateRequest Annotations](#certificaterequest-annotations)
  * [Test Plan](#test-plan)
  * [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  * [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
      - [Alpha](#alpha)
      - [Alpha -> Beta Graduation](#alpha---beta-graduation)
      - [Beta -> GA Graduation](#beta---ga-graduation)
      - [Removing a deprecated flag](#removing-a-deprecated-flag)
  * [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
<!-- /toc -->

:warning: Parts of this design are out of date with regards to the current implementation.

See also https://cert-manager.io/docs/concepts/certificaterequest/.

## Summary

Currently, certificates issued via cert-manager rely on the `Certificate`
resource being reconciled by the `Certificate` controller. This resource imposes
limitations on what issuers are able to honour the `Certificate` resource as
well as other opinionated implementation details.

This proposal adds a new custom resource `CertificateRequest` that contains an
x509 certificate signing request, a target issuer, and other metadata about the
request. Each issuer will have their own `CertificateRequest` controller to
watch for resources that are referencing them. The `Certificate` controller will
then rely on creating `CertificateRequest`s to resolve its own Spec.

## Motivation

Currently the required use of the `Certificate` resource means that users are
forced to:

- expose the signed certificate's private key to the API server
- be limited to the finite set of issuers as implemented into the cert-manager
  project, or, "in-tree"
- adhere to the `Certificate` controller's opinionated implementation, limiting
  scope for integrations with other projects
- rely on developers of the cert-manager project for reviews and approval of new
  issuers

Due to these issues, cert-manager can be often unsuitable for some use
cases/integrations or users are unsatisfied with some behaviour. Lack of
exposure of options that a raw x509 certificate signing request provides can
also be a source of frustration.

With cert-manger maintainers ensuring that all issuers are always fully
supported and tested, it becomes difficult for new issuers to become
accepted. Some developers of new issuers would be happy to maintain these
issuers themselves however is not possible with all issuers belonging in the
same code base and repository.

### Goals

- Introduce the `CertificateRequest` resource.
- Create a `CertificateRequest` controller for each in-tree issuer to resolve
  `CertificateRequest`.
- Change the implementation of the `Certificate` controller to rely on the
  `CertificateRequest` resource to resolve the request.
- Update documentation detailing this new behaviour and how it can be used to
  develop out-of-tree implantations of an issuer `CertificateRequest`
  controller.
- Create a boilerplate/scaffolding example code to help quick start developers
  on creating a controller with best practices.

### Non-Goals

- This proposal does not document or explore possible or planned integrations
  using this new functionality.
- This proposal will not investigate possible alignment or merging with the
  Kubernetes internal `CertificateSigningRequest` resource. Although it is of
  interest, the motivation is mostly in order to get a built-in approval workflow
  for CertificateRequests. The feasibility of being able to implement a solution
  using the built-in type in the near future however is small, so we'd rather
  'trail-blaze' here and then try and fold our changes back upstream at a later
  date.

## Proposal

### API Changes

This proposal will create the following new API types in the
`cert-manager.io` group;

```golang
// CertificateRequestSpec defines the desired state of CertificateRequest
type CertificateRequestSpec struct {
	// Requested certificate default Duration
	// +optional
	Duration *metav1.Duration `json:"duration,omitempty"`

	// IssuerRef is a reference to the issuer for this CertificateRequest.  If
	// the 'kind' field is not set, or set to 'Issuer', an Issuer resource with
	// the given name in the same namespace as the CertificateRequest will be
	// used.  If the 'kind' field is set to 'ClusterIssuer', a ClusterIssuer with
	// the provided name will be used. The 'name' field in this stanza is
	// required at all times. The group field refers to the API group of the
	// issuer which defaults to 'cert-manager.io' if empty.
	IssuerRef ObjectReference `json:"issuerRef"`

	// Byte slice containing the PEM encoded CertificateSigningRequest
	CSRPEM []byte `json:"csr"`

	// IsCA will mark the resulting certificate as valid for signing. This
	// implies that the 'signing' usage is set
	// +optional
	IsCA bool `json:"isCA,omitempty"`
}

// CertificateStatus defines the observed state of CertificateRequest and
// resulting signed certificate.
type CertificateRequestStatus struct {
	// +optional
	Conditions []CertificateRequestCondition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`

	// Byte slice containing a PEM encoded signed certificate resulting from the
	// given certificate signing request.
	// +optional
	Certificate []byte `json:"certificate,omitempty"`

	// Byte slice containing the PEM encoded certificate authority of the signed
	// certificate.
	// +optional
	CA []byte `json:"ca,omitempty"`

	// FailureTime stores the time that this CertificateRequest failed.
	// This is used to influence garbage collection and back-off.
	// +optional
	FailureTime *metav1.Time `json:"failureTime,omitempty"`
}
```

The `CertificateRequestCondition` resembles much the same of the
`CertificateRequestCondition`.

The `ObjectReference` field type has had a new field `Group` added as follows:

```golang
// ObjectReference is a reference to an object with a given name, kind and group.
type ObjectReference struct {
	Name string `json:"name"`
	// +optional
	Kind string `json:"kind,omitempty"`
	// +optional
	Group string `json:"group,omitempty"`
}
```

The group refers to the API group that the target Issuer belongs to. This
enables namespacing of references to different issuers of external API groups.

#### Approved and Denied Conditions

The CertificateRequest resource has [Approved and Denied
conditions](https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/blob/7204284063702358164713379b07b73642ea9bec/pkg/apis/certmanager/v1/types_certificaterequest.go#L194).
These conditions are based upon the [certificates.k8s.io
CertificateSigningRequest](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/3a2d6b5bb7f84daa2125131865eb81b151448d5b/certificates/v1/types.go#L198)
conditions of the same name. The purpose of these conditions is so that users,
or "approvers", are able to mark a request as either Approved or Denied. This
condition gates a signer from signing the request. A signer waits for a
CertificateRequest to have an Approved condition before signing. A
CertificateRequest with a Denied condition will never be signed.

##### Behaviour

The Approved and Denied conditions are two distinct condition types on the
CertificateRequest. These conditions must only have the status of True, and
are mutually exclusive (i.e. a CertificateRequest cannot have an Approved and
Denied condition simultaneously). This behaviour is enforced in the cert-manager
validating admission webhook.

An "approver" is an entity that is responsible for setting the Approved/Denied
conditions. It is up to the approver's implementation as to what
CertificateRequests are managed by that approver.

The Reason field of the Approved/Denied condition should be set to *who* set the
condition. Who can be interpreted however makes sense to the approver
implementation. For example, it may include the API group of an approving policy
controller, or the client agent of a manual request.

The Message field of the Approved/Denied condition should be set to *why* the
condition is set. Again, why can be interpreted however makes sense to the
implementation of the approver. For example, the name of the resource that
approves this request, the violations which caused the request to be denied, or
the team to who manually approved the request.

A CertificateRequest that is Denied is considered to be in a final, failed
state. If it was created for an issuance of a Certificate, the associated
issuance will be failed.
##### RBAC

Approved and Denied conditions are set by requesting against the `/status`
endpoint of the CertificateRequest resource. This is a divergence of the
certificates.k8s.io CertificateSigningRequest resource that utilises `approval`,
as CustomResourceDefinitions may [only define `/status` or `/scale`
sub-resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#subresources).
Approvers must therefore have permissions to update the status sub-resource of
CertificateRequests. Approvers missing this permissions will have their request
rejected by the API server.

Setting the Approved or Denied conditions are restricted by the approver having
sufficient RBAC permissions. These permissions are based upon the request
itself - specifically the request's IssuerRef:

```yaml
apiGroups: ["cert-manager.io"]
resources: ["signers"]
verbs: ["approve"]
resourceNames:
 # namespaced signers
 - "<signer-resource-types>.<signer-group>/<signer-namespace>.<signer-name>"
 # cluster scoped signers
 - "<signer-resource-types>.<signer-group>/<signer-name>"
 # all signers of this resource name
 - "<signer-resource-types>.<signer-group>/*"
```

An example ClusterRole that would grant the permissions to set the Approve and
Denied conditions of CertificateRequests that reference the cluster scoped
`myissuers` external issuer, in the group `my-example.io`, with the name `myapp`:

```
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: my-example-io-my-issuer-myapp-approver
rules:
  - apiGroups: ["cert-manager.io"]
    resources: ["signers"]
    verbs: ["approve"]
    resourceNames: ["myissuers.my-example.io/myapp"]
```

These permissions are enforced using a
[SubjectAccessReview](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/b11d0fbdd58394a62622787b38e98a620df82750/pkg/apis/authorization/types.go#L27)
that is requested by the cert-manager Webhook component when an approver
attempts to set the Approve or Denied condition. The approver UserInfo and
IssuerRef fields on the CertificateRequest are used to build the
SubjectAccessReview.

If the approver does not have sufficient permissions defined above to set the
Approved or Denied conditions, the request will be rejected by the cert-manager
validating admission webhook.

###### Scope

The RBAC permissions *must* be granted at the cluster scope (i.e.
ClusterRoleBinding). This matches the same scoping behaviour as
[certificates.k8s.io
CertificateSigningRequests](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#authorization).

Namespaced signers are represented by a namespaced resource using the syntax of
`<signer-resource-types>.<signer-group>/<signer-namespace>.<signer-name>`

###### apiGroup

The `apiGroup` must *always* be `cert-manager.io`, as all CertificateRequests
are in the `cert-manager.io` group. Even though some signers may themselves not
belong to the `cert-manager.io` group, the approve operation does.

###### resource

The `resource` must *always* be `signers`. This matches the same resource as
[required by certificates.k8s.io
CertificateSigningRequests](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/certificate-signing-requests/#authorization).

###### verbs

The `verbs` must *always* be `approve`. This verb grants the approver the
permissions to set *both* Approved and Denied conditions.

###### resourceNames

Each entry of `resourceNames` is made up of 3 parts: the signer resource type, signer group, and the
signer name.

The signer resource type should be the same string of the resource type of the
signer.

The signer group should be the same string of the group of signer.

The name may be either a wild card '*' denoting all signer names in all
namespaces, or instead a string which must match optionally a namespace,
followed by the signer name as it appears in the IssuerRef.

An example of signing all `myissuer` signers in all namespaces, and
`clustermyissuers` with the name `myapp`, in the `my-example.io` group:

```yaml
    resourceNames:
    # With the following, the user (i.e., the approver) can approve the CertificateRequests
    # that reference any namespaced-scoped issuer of the type MyIssuers, in the
    # group my-example.io, in any namespace with any name:
    - myissuers.my-example.io/*
    # Similar to the above, but any cluster-scoped issuer of the type
    # ClusterMyIssuer:
    - clustermyissuers.my-example.io/myapp
```

```yaml
    resourceNames:
    # With the following, the user (i.e., the approver) can only approve the
    # CertificateRequests in the namespace "foo" and that reference the
    # namespace-scoped MyIssuer, in the group my-example.io, named "myapp":
    - myissuers.my-example.io/foo.myapp
    # Similar to the above, but in the namespace "bar":
    - myissuers.my-example.io/bar.myapp
```

##### Webhook signer string building

The validating admission webhook is responsible for making SubjectAccessReviews
to evaluate whether the approver has [sufficient permissions to add the Approved
or Denied conditions](#rbac). The webhook will attempt to first check whether
the use can approve all signers in all namespaced (wildcard), and if this fails,
whether it can approve for the exact signer (`.<signer-name>` or
`<signer-namespace>.<signer-name>`).

The webhook will keep a cache of the [Discovery
API](https://github.com/kubernetes/client-go/blob/f6ce18ae578c8cca64d14ab9687824d9e1305a67/discovery/discovery_client.go#L55)
which will be used to determine whether a referenced signer is namespaced or
not. If it is namespaced, the `<signer-namespace>` will be populated with the
namespace that the CertificateRequest resides in. If the scope of the resource
cannot be determined, the request will be rejected.


##### cert-manager Approver

The cert-manager controller is deployed with an internal approver controller.
This controller will attempt to approve *all* CertificateRequests that are
created, regardless of the contents of the request, or the issuer they
reference.

By default, this approver is given the permission to approve all internal
signers, that is `Issuer` and `ClusterIssuer` `cert-manager.io` signers. This
means its ClusterRole is given the `resourceNames`: `issuers.cert-manager.io/*`
and `clusterissuers.cert-manager.io/*`

External issuers may consider whether they wish to install further RBAC that
would allow the cert-manager approver controller to also approve
CertificateRequests that reference these external issuers. This would involve
creating a ClusterRole that permits approving that signer type, and binding that
role to the cert-manager-controller ServiceAccount.

The default cert-manager approver controller may be disabled by adding the
`--controllers=*,-certificaterequests-approver` argument to the
`cert-manager-controller` component. This allows for other approvers to make
decisions about CertificateRequests, without racing against the internal
approver controller.

### Controller Behaviour

The philosophy for the `CertificateRequest` controllers are planned to be as
minimal as possible in that the single goal of them is to enable its owning
`Issuer` to create the resulting certificate. Once a sync on a
`CertificateRequest` has been observed, the general flow is as follows:

- Check the group belongs to the owning `Issuer`, exit if not.
- Check if `CertificateRequest` is in a terminal failed state.
  A controller may choose to add additional conditions to a failed `CertificateRequest`, but must not attempt to issue a certificate.
  Currently terminal failed states are:
  - `Ready` condition with a `Failed` reason // usually set by the issuer
  - `InvalidRequest` condition with `True` status // usually set by the issuer
  - `Denied` condition with `True` status // usually set by approver

- Check the `Issuer` type is of the same type, exit if not.
- Verify the Spec of the `CertificateRequest`.
- If a certificate exits then update the status if needed and exit.
- Sign the certificate via the Issuer using the contents of Spec.

It is worth noting that whether the certificate is invalid, out-of-date or
failed then the controller should take no further action on the resource. It is
the responsibility of a higher level controller such as the `Certificate`
controller to take further action to retry the certificate issuance through
managing the life cycle of the `CertificateRequest` resources.

With all `Issuer`s updated with `CertificateRequest` controllers, the
`Certificate` controller will be migrated to begin to use and manage the life
cycle `CertificateRequest`s to resolve it's Spec. Further concrete
implementation details TBD.


#### ACME

The `CertificateRequest` controller is responsible for creating `Order`
resources to fulfil ACME certificate requests. If the `Order` fails due to a
non-networking or other non-transient issue then the `Order` is marked as failed
- this means the `CertificateRequest` too shall be marked as failed and no
further processing will take place by the `CertificateRequest` controller on
this resource.

#### Issuing Controller

Issuing controller considers all Denied CertificateRequests to be in a final failed state.
The issuance will be failed and will be repeatedly retried with an exponential backoff ../20220118.certificate-issuance-exponential-backoff.md.
If the cause of the denial was a misconfigured Certificate spec, the issuance will be retried immediately once the spec is corrected.
If the cause of the denial was misconfigured policy resources, a user who has fixed the resources and wants to retry immediately can do so using [cmctl renew](https://cert-manager.io/docs/reference/cmctl/#renew)

The issuing controller does not check Approved condition. It is the issuer's
responsibility not to issue certificates for CertificateRequests that have not
been approved.

### Failure

A `CertificateRequest` is considered in a final failed state if:
- it has a Ready condition with Failed reason
- it has a Denied condition with True status
- it has InvalidRequest reason with True status

### Internal API Resource Behaviour

The group name of `IssuerRef` inside `CertificateRequest`s is to be defaulted
to "cert-manager.io" if the field is empty, using a mutating webhook. This
means that if unspecified, `CertificateRequest` objects will be put into the
ownership of the default pool of issuers in the cert-manager project.

Until the mutating webhook is fully implemented, we will handle defaulting
internally in the controller.

### CertificateRequest Annotations
In order for `CertificateRequest` controllers to resolve requests, extra
information may be needed that is not present in the API Spec. To pass on this
information, a set of one or more annotations should be defined, with reliable
value pairs. These annotations should be considered optional. Any
`CertificateRequest` controller that relies on these to function should
fallback gracefully or be marked as failed in the event a required annotation is
missing. The currently defined annotations are:

- `cert-manager.io/private-key-secret-name`: The name of the secret, in the
  same namespace as the `CertificateRequest`, that stores the private key which
  was used to sign the x509 certificate signing request. This is required by the
  `SelfSigning` issuer to sign its own certificate. If this annotation is missing
  or empty, the `SelfSign` `CertificateRequest` controller will mark the resource
  as failed and no further processing will take place on it. Currently the
  `Certificate` controller adds this annotation to all `CertificateRequest`
  resources it creates with the defined `SecretName` in the Spec of the
  `Certificate`.

### Test Plan

Standard unit and end-to-end tests will be used to verify new behaviour, as used
by cert-manager currently. Current end-to-end tests for `Certificate` resources
will also give a good signal for `CertificateRequest`s once the controller has
migrated its implementation.

### Risks and Mitigations

The introduction and consequently the reliance on this core resource for all
cert-manager functions means it poses a high risk to bugs or unexpected behaviour
appearing across the whole codebase. With this, it is key to ensure the change
happens in incremental roll-outs and proper care is taken during testing.

The new resource could be potentially confusing for current cert-manager
users. To mitigate this, proper documentation should be created to explain the
changes. It should also be made clear that the resource is typically only to be
consumed or managed by a more complex controller or system, not necessarily a
human user.

### Graduation Criteria

##### Alpha

- Creation of `CertificateRequest` resource.
- A CA issuer `CertificateRequest` controller.
- Exposing the single controller via a feature gated flag.

##### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

- All issuers have a `CertificateRequest` controller.
- All controllers are enabled by default.
- The `Certificate` controller optionally makes use of the `CertificateRequest`
  resource to resolve certificates when a feature flag is enabled.

##### Beta -> GA Graduation

- The `CertificateRequest` API resource should be considered stable.
- The `Certificate` controller makes use of the `CertificateRequest` resource to
  resolve certificates.

##### Removing a deprecated flag

### Version Skew Strategy
